(Start of Inrerview)

Interviewer: What are the worst skills, or characteristics, for an engineer to have? 

Interviewee: In some jobs, being highly individualistic can be a killer. Not in all jobs, but in some jobs. In a research environment, where an engineer can go off and do his own thing, that can be okay. But in the vast majority of jobs, not being strong in communication, and of course, technical skills, can have a very negative impact on your career. In fact, in a survey in the ASME magazine about two or three years ago, the top two skills employers wanted were communication skills and teamwork skills. 

Interviewer: What is the difference between the academic world and industry? I know there are some similarities too, what are those? 

Interviewee: In the academic world, people tend to be more reflective, more analytical, and less hands-on. That's not always the case, but it tends to be that way. It's partially because people who are attracted to this environment tend to be that way. In industry, the people tend to be more hands-on but the analytical skills tend to atrophy when not used. The academic environment cultivates those skills. But the environment is changing. There are more hands-on activities being added to the curriculum, along with some tighter links to industry. There is more of a need to be an entrepreneur and salesmen. 

Interviewer: What is the typical day in the life of a mechanical engineer like? 

Interviewee: A typical day varies radically for mechanical engineers depending on the job you have. A guy doing research is more independent, a guy doing customer service is dealing with people all day long, while a manager deals mainly with projects. It can really vary depending on what you want to do. 

Interviewer: What can a person do to improve their situation? 

Interviewee: The first thing is to define the company's best practices. Define the process and look for ways to improve the process, to make it more efficient. I think that's the idea behind the 9000 stuff, like ISO 9000 and QS 9000, to document the process. Unfortunately, some people just go through the motions, which is really a shame and a waste of time. You've got to take it seriously to do things the most efficient way. But I think the real key issue is getting people in areas they love to work. When you do that, the effort will be there. For example, I met a young engineer at Boeing who had been hired three times in the last three years by Boeing. She loved working with people and making decisions. Unfortunately, in her first two jobs she only made decisions once every two or three months and she hated it. Now they have her in a people where she's working with people and making decisions and she loves it. I think it's real important for companies to match people with what they love to do. 

Interviewer: In general, what methods or criteria are used to evaluate mechanical engineers? 

Interviewee: At Boeing, the backs of the engineer's badges have criteria that is wanted for the engineers to work on at Boeing. There are twelve things: technical skills, communications, teamwork, initiative, productivity, continuous quality improvement, customer satisfaction, innovation and creativity, integrity ' that's really become a big issue in industry, especially at Boeing when I was there with the merger and all, leadership, risk-taking, and developing people. 

Interviewer: I find it interesting to see that risk-taking is on there. It seemed like that has never been encouraged at GM. 

Interviewee: Well, you can't just go taking incredible risks. They are calculated risks. 

Interviewer: When designing a new product, what issues are typically given the most consideration? 

Interviewee: Again, it varies depending on the product. First, you have to understand the customer and find a way to give them what they want. You have to get a sense of where the market is going. Take inline skates. They came out of nowhere and now they're selling four million skates a year. It was a local market in California and they took it national. Being able to see needs is very important and having the creativity to know how to meet them is the hard part. 

Interviewer: Is the procedure for process development similar to that for products? 

Interviewee: Yeah, I'd say they're similar. You need to do some benchmarking on what's out there to see where you stand and brainstorm to find what you can do. 

Interviewer: How are design procedures developed and followed in corporations? 

Interviewee: Wow, those procedures vary greatly and to tell you the truth, I don't think they're followed very tightly. Part of the problem is that I don't think they are stated explicitly. You don't want to be rigid, but you need to be efficient. You need to come up with a plan and extrapolate what you can based on your design. It's a real art at this stage. It needs to be tailored to what you are trying to accomplish. There are multiple approaches to this, but it really needs to be designed explicitly and improved from there. 

Interviewer: What does a graduating mechanical engineer need to know that he probably does not know? 

Interviewee: It's not so much what you don't know as much as it is what will change. The things you like to do now might now be what you like to do in the future. Interest change in time and there must be a willingness to change with them. I think another important thing to recognize for some students is that your whole life is not your job. It can be very easy to ignore other things, but I think the real key is balance. The ME program is very rigorous and everyone is working very hard, and as a result sometimes they don't recognize the need for balance. 

Interviewer: Thanks for your time. 

Interviewee: You're welcome.

(End of Interview)